DAOS-17306 doc: self-healing properties, interactive rebuild (#18023)
daos-stack/daos: docs/admin/self_healing.md

# Detailed Pool Operations: Self-Healing (Rebuild) Configuration

## Introduction

This section describes some of the mechanisms using the `dmg` tool that can be
employed to manage DAOS' self-healing feature. As a reminder, the system
consists of a set of DAOS engine instances that join the system when they are
started. An engine is assigned a numeric rank upon initially joining the system.
This document may frequently interchange the term "rank" and "engine" to refer
to a DAOS engine.

By default, the system works as previous versions (per-pool `self_heal`

> property) if one doesn't modify the "new" system `self_heal` property. An

Reviewer: [Nit] This assumes the current release to 2.8, which is not the case for master. Might reword 'the "new" system `self_heal` property' to something like 'the system `self_heal` property introduced in 2.8', and "previous versions" to something like "pre-2.8 versions".

Reviewer 2: addressed

administrator doesn't have to use the new system `self_heal` after upgrading to
DAOS version 2.8 and instead can choose to adopt it in the administrator's
workflow when the need arises.

DAOS behavior can be managed through "system" and "pool" properties.

### System and Per-pool Properties

System-level properties apply to system behavior and examples include system
name and pool scrub mode. System-level properties are shared and centralized in
the control-plane management service and can be read by the code in the DAOS
engines as needed. Some properties are also writable. The administrator can read
and write system properties using `dmg system get-prop` / `dmg system set-prop`.

Pool-level properties apply to pool-specific behavior and each pool has its own
set of pool-properties, which can be read and written by the system

> administrator using `dmg pool get-prop` / `dmg pool set-prop`.

Reviewer: [Nit] Might want to remind users about the need to escape `;` (as in `exclude\;rebuild`).

Reviewer 2: addressed

### Self-heal Properties

The `self_heal` property describes behavior associated with self-healing and can
be set at both the system and pool levels. For a given pool to perform the

> recovery actions (map change, rebuild), the policy needs to be enabled at both

Reviewer 2: may be explain that "map change"=="exclude" for clarity

Author: added some words to explicitly mention exclude

needs to be enabled at both the system and per-pool level.

The system level property has flags `exclude;pool_exclude;pool_rebuild` which
indicate the following:

* **`exclude`** — Whether engines get excluded from the system membership based
  on (SWIM) activity detection.
* **`pool_exclude`** — Whether when engine/target states change (e.g., as a
  result of engine exclusion from the system), all relevant affected pools' pool

>   maps will be automatically updated (or not).

Reviewer: [Nit] For both "exclude"s, I feel that for users an important info is to know this: When disabled, future operations (pool create, object update, rebuild tasks, etc.) may time out and retry until either the exclusion happens or the unavailable targets/engines become available again.

Reviewer 2: re. "exclusion happens" isn't this dependent on the exclusion flag in question being enabled? "or the unavailable targets/engines become available again" doesn't immediately make sense to me in the context of the "exclude" flags, isn't that just a general statement?

Reviewer: > re. "exclusion happens" isn't this dependent on the exclusion flag in question being enabled?

Yes.

> "or the unavailable targets/engines become available again" doesn't immediately make sense to me in the context of the "exclude" flags, isn't that just a general statement?

Hmm, I’m not sure if this is specific or general, but let me try again: If auto exclusions are disabled (either at the pool or the system level), then when an engine / target becomes unavailable, operations may time out and retry until the engine / target is excluded (either manually or by re-enabling auto exclusions) or until the engine or target becomes available again. I hope this expanded version makes more sense.

* **`pool_rebuild`** — Whether, following a pool map update, rebuild activities
  automatically get triggered (or not) for the affected pools.

The pool level property has flags `exclude;rebuild;delay_rebuild` which indicate
the following:

* **`pool.exclude`** — Related to the `system.pool_exclude` property and
  together they determine if a specific pool's pool map will be updated.
  Automatic pool map change happens iff `system.pool_exclude` and
  `pool.exclude` are set to true.
* **`pool.rebuild`** — Related to the `system.pool_rebuild` property and
  together they determine if rebuild activity will be automatically triggered
  upon a pool map update. Automatic rebuild on a pool will happen iff
  `system.pool_rebuild` and `pool.rebuild` are set to true.
* **`delay_rebuild`** — Mutually exclusive with `rebuild` and specifies that
  rebuild does not necessarily trigger automatically and can be delayed based on
  user requirements. Delay rebuild is mostly out of scope for this section.

> On starting a DAOS system and pool creation, default `self_heal` flags will be

Reviewer: Hmm, you mean "on **creating** a DAOS system"? If one modifies system `self_heal` to, say, `exclude`, then restarting the system will not "reset" this property to `exclude;pool_exclude;pool_rebuild`.

Reviewer 2: addressed

set as follows:

* **System-level:** `exclude;pool_exclude;pool_rebuild`
* **Pool-level:** `exclude;rebuild`

The following sections describe different administration scenarios, and how
self-heal property settings can be applied in each case. When a scenario
describes loss of an engine and waiting for a "detection delay", the delay
refers roughly to the amount of time for:

* Two SWIM protocol periods to occur,
* Plus a SWIM suspicion timeout to occur,
* Plus a `CRT_EVENT_DELAY` number of seconds to elapse, during which failure
  events can be aggregated into a logical event,
* Plus some margin of error.

## Pool Query Data Redundancy Status

> **Available in:** DAOS 2.6+

Reviewer: [Nit] 2.6 doesn't have it, IIRC. So perhaps clearer to say something like "2.8 and later" or ">= 2.8".

Reviewer 2: addressed

The `dmg pool query` command displays the pool's data redundancy status as part
of the health information output. This field provides a clear indication of

> whether the pool has sufficient target availability to maintain data redundancy.

Reviewer: [Question] Is it really accurate? My understanding is that there may be sufficient targets available, but the data redundancy can still be degraded, for example, because the rebuild task is still in progress, or is temporarily disabled.

Reviewer 2: addressed

   occurred even when rebuild doesn't start automatically (e.g., when using
   `exclude` without `rebuild` flags)
3. **Before manually triggering rebuild** — Confirm that exclusion is complete
   and degraded state exists
4. **After rebuild completion** — Verify that redundancy has been restored to
   `normal` status
5. **During troubleshooting** — Quick health check without parsing complex output

### Example: Verifying Exclusion with Exclude-Only Policy

When the self-heal policy has `exclude` but not `rebuild` (either at system or
pool level), the `Data redundancy` field confirms that exclusion occurred:

```bash
$ dmg pool query my_pool
Pool 6f450a68-8c7d-4da9-8900-02691650f6a2, ntarget=8, disabled=1, state=TargetsExcluded
Pool health info:
- Disabled ranks: 3
- Rebuild idle
- Data redundancy: degraded  ← Confirms exclusion completed
```

The combination of:
- `Disabled ranks: 3` — Shows which rank was excluded
- `Rebuild idle` — No automatic rebuild triggered (expected with exclude-only policy)
- `Data redundancy: degraded` — Confirms data redundancy is impaired and manual
  intervention is needed

> To restore redundancy, manually trigger rebuild:

Author: ```suggestion
To restore redundancy for the excluded targets, manually trigger rebuild. Refer to [Detailed Pool Operations: Interactive Rebuild Controls](rebuild_controls.md) for more information about rebuild start commands.
```

* Plus some margin of error.

## Pool Query Data Redundancy Status

**Available in:** DAOS 2.6+

The `dmg pool query` command displays the pool's data redundancy status as part
of the health information output. This field provides a clear indication of
whether the pool has sufficient target availability to maintain data redundancy.

### Output Field

The `Data redundancy` field appears in the pool health information section:

```
Pool health info:
- Rebuild idle
- Data redundancy: normal
```

> or when targets are excluded:

Author: ```suggestion
or when targets are excluded and a corresponding rebuild has not yet completed:
```

```
Pool health info:
- Rebuild busy, 42 objs, 21 recs
- Data redundancy: degraded
```

> 

Author: Something I thought of, but no change requested
there are other cases like drain that would show Rebuild busy but Data redundancy: normal
And I guess extend might show something similar. But it's probably not worth enumerating too many cases actually.

### Field Values

| Value | Meaning |
|-------|---------|

> | `normal` | All targets are UP and accessible; data redundancy is intact |

Author: ```suggestion
| `normal` | No targets are DOWN; data redundancy is intact |
```

Reasoning is for targets that are being reintegrated, their state is UP (but not yet UP_IN). The data redundancy would likely be intact in this case, if a previous exclude rebuild finished successfully.

### When to Check This Field

1. **After automatic or manual exclusion** — Confirm that exclusion has completed
2. **When self-heal is configured without automatic rebuild** — Verify exclusion
   occurred even when rebuild doesn't start automatically (e.g., when using
   `exclude` without `rebuild` flags)
3. **Before manually triggering rebuild** — Confirm that exclusion is complete
   and degraded state exists
4. **After rebuild completion** — Verify that redundancy has been restored to
   `normal` status
5. **During troubleshooting** — Quick health check without parsing complex output

### Example: Verifying Exclusion with Exclude-Only Policy

When the self-heal policy has `exclude` but not `rebuild` (either at system or
pool level), the `Data redundancy` field confirms that exclusion occurred:

```bash
$ dmg pool query my_pool
Pool 6f450a68-8c7d-4da9-8900-02691650f6a2, ntarget=8, disabled=1, state=TargetsExcluded
Pool health info:
- Disabled ranks: 3
- Rebuild idle
- Data redundancy: degraded  ← Confirms exclusion completed
```

The combination of:
- `Disabled ranks: 3` — Shows which rank was excluded

> - `Rebuild idle` — No automatic rebuild triggered (expected with exclude-only policy)

Author: ```suggestion
- `Rebuild idle` or `Rebuild done`— idle if pool has not been rebuilt since system start, done if it has been rebuild for a prior change. No new automatic rebuild triggered for this exclusion (expected with exclude-only policy)
```
